Israel says waves of its warplanes have
carried out preemptive strikes against
Hezbollah militant Targets in Lebanon
where authorities reported three deaths
Hezbollah says it has launched drones
against Israel in retaliation for the
assassination of one of its
[Music]
commanders early morning in Northern
Israel the Iron Dome Springs into action
as hasbalah begins what the militant
group calls phase one of an attack on
his is hundreds of rockets and drones
fired towards 11 military sites it says
it's in retaliation for the killing of
one of its commanders in Beirut last
month in a statement Hezbollah said all
offensive drones were launched that
their designated times and from all
their positions our military operation
for today has been completed the enemy's
claims regarding its preemptive actions
the targets it allegedly hit and its
supposed disruption of hezbollah's
attack are baseless and contradict the
facts on the
ground Israel says it began preemptive
air strikes on Sunday against Hezbollah
Targets in Lebanon after they detected
plans of an attack against its
territory the IDF claimed 100 fighter
jets have struck and destroyed thousands
of Hezbollah rocket launcher barrels
aimed at
Israel it also released these images it
says are of a Hezbollah drone being
intercepted Israel's prime minister
issued a warning after an emergency
National Security cabinet
meeting we are determined to do
everything to protect our country return
the residents of the north to their
homes and continue to follow a simple
rule whoever hurts us we hurt
them Sunday's escalation further
heightens tensions as talks continue to
reach a ceasefire and hostage release
deal in
Gaza for more let's bring in our
correspondent in Jerusalem Tanya ker
Tanya described the state of emergency
in Israel right
now well somehow you know people
anticipated a retaliation by Hezbollah
and also at some point by Iran after the
high uh profile targeted killings in
Beirut and tan last month that were
attributed uh to uh Israel so Israel has
been preparing uh for that and it was
not a matter of if but when and how
these counter strikes would look like
whether they could be limited or
contained or whether this will lead to
an allout war in the region now Israel
said they had launched at shortly before
5:00 a.m. in the morning with over 100
war planes of fighter jets uh these what
they described as preemptive strikes uh
at launching uh sides they said they
targeted about 40 uh different areas uh
there and Hezbollah has said they had
been successful in launching over 300
missiles and drones at Israel they said
they targeted military targets now we
have heard now here from the Israeli
side that they reject the uh claim that
military targets were actually hit now
uh Hezbollah has said this first phase
is concluded but what does it mean here
for people now we've been seeing in the
early morning there was a uh security
cabinet meeting an emergency mode uh uh
was um said to be installed now the uh
air traffic also Boron was then for some
time being interrupted now it has been
back on track now but some of the there
are still delays being said some of the
uh major foreign Airlines have now
extended their suspension of air of of
their flights to Tel Aviv also the home
front command this morning was changed
for people especially in Tel Aviv and
the northern area of course um they had
been restricted but those restrictions
have now been lifted as of 12:30 uh
local times they have not been lifted
for people further up north they have
been living with crossborder attacks
between Hezbollah and Lebanon you know
for many many months now since October
last year we know that approximately
60,000 people have not been able to
return home also in all these months
this is of course also a situation that
is not really acceptable for Israel now
we have to wait and see of course what
the next moves will what are the next
moves thank you very much for bringing
us up today Tanya ker in Jerusalem for
us and let's go over to our
correspondent Muhammad sha who is in
Lebanon U Muhammad Hezbollah called
these attacks a strategic Target give us
some more
context wellah said that it launched
more than 300 missiles to disrupt
Israel's aerial defenses Paving the way
for tens of attacking drawns to cross
toward uh military bases in Northern uh
Israel now in a series of statements uh
issued by uh the militant group said
that it hit what it called a strategic
Target uh that will be revealed uh soon
that was the sentence used in a
statement and more information about
this is expected in a speech by the
party leader Hassan nah uh this evening
but several security sources and media
reports said that the party attempted to
hit a uh security uh facility or
security facilities near Tel Aviv
including a secret base used by the
mosad now whether it hit the target or
not is yet to be uh confirmed uh media
reports coming out of Israel suggest
that the attack did not reach U Tel Aviv
whatsoever this was the largest attacks
from Lebanon on Israel since the uh
outbreak of this conflict in October and
otherwise uh what else have or how else
have people been reacting uh to these
attacks well it's it's looking quite
normal uh for a Sunday here in in Beirut
the attacks brought about anxiety in the
morning and fears that uh an Israeli
response now could widen the conflict
further but soon as hasbalah announced
the completion of uh this military
operation also reports coming uh uh from
Israel in the same direction meaning
that uh Israeli response to this
incident is is over the front gradually
went back to the daily routine of ticks
for tax and uh intermittent crossb uh
shelling between both parties so life
went back relatively to the usual here
in Beirut some Airlines canceled flights
uh to and from uh beirut's airport the
caretaker government also met in the
morning to discuss the development and
um the spokesperson said that it it's
reaching out to mediators to deescalate
the
situation and the latest there from DWS
Mahammad sh thank
you and more context on the latest
developments now from Christopher Morris
he's a security expert at the University
of Portsmouth Israel's military says it
foiled a much larger attack with
preemptive strikes but heesa denies they
had any impact and says it managed to
hit Israeli military targets although
Israel called that damage small scale
what's your
take I think more than anything these
latest wave of attacks really Hammer
home the effectiveness of the Israeli
air defense system it has proved
incredibly Adept at intercepting the
vast majority of strikes coming from
Hezbollah of course it's also the case
that their preemptive strikes carried
out on the basis of robust intelligence
will have significantly degraded Ed the
planned attack by
Hezbollah but Hezbollah says this is
just the beginning the military group
recently released videos of its huge
tunnel Network what threat does it pose
to
Israel um well of course the a lot of
interesting things going on with hezar
at the moment not only they said that
these latest wave of attacks are simply
phase one of what is likely to be a far
larger and more sophisticated operation
they have also released some interesting
footage of their extensive tunnel
Network within Lebanon now with this
they're probably sending a number of
messages first of all they're saying
that you know we have extensive
networking storage and concealment and
we can continue doing what we are
currently doing for an extended period
of time they're also kind of I suppose
telegraphing the risk of infiltration
and you know it's a real show of force
from Hezbollah which is interesting to
see at this
juncture Yemen's iran-backed hoodie
Rebels uh praise the hezbo attacks and
renewed threats to launch their own what
do you make of those
statements now one of the biggest
concerned in both you know the interest
of International Security and on behalf
of Israel at the moment is going to be
coordinated pressure coming from Hamas
Hezbollah and the houthis at one time
now coordinated efforts on any scale
would present a major challenge it's
something they've struggled to do so far
but given their common backer in Iran
that is going to be a key concern over
the coming months
isn't that exactly when Israel has its
back up against the wall when it's
attacked on multiple fronts
simultaneously yes of course and their
biggest fear is going to be another
large Iranian attack and a combination
of attacks from kind of like the triple
hes happening at once that could be
enough to is overwhelm the extensive
Israeli air defenses and that would
present a major challenge How likely is
this so-called attack or reprisal attack
from Iran uh right now considering
everyone's been bracing for this for
some time after the killing of course of
hamas's political Chief is hania in
tan of course yes so there is increasing
concern that there is going to be an
Iranian response uh so far we've seen
that well we've seen the large scale
attack and we've also seen intense
pressure stemming from its proxies
across the region now again coordination
is going to be a major issue there if we
were to see a large Iranian attack again
I would expect the US which maintains a
heavy presence in the region to get
involved in intercepting any strike so
whilst it is a major concern there are I
suppose International forces to consider
in the region as well well the US also
has carriers that have uh arrived in the
region but just summing up how would you
rate the risk of allout War now
considering all of these
developments it's a precarious balance
on the one hand nobody wants to face
another front a ground war in Lebanon
and everybody is mindful of escalation
on the other hand we have this
persistent need on behalf of everybody
involved to maintain face and that seems
to be one of the the key aspects driving
the conflict at the moment so it's a
very precarious balance that we're in at
the moment is that the only hope for
deescalation Saving
Face um well it's actually I would say
Saving Face is what's driving the
violence you know you have this
persistent need on behalf of Hezbollah
Hamas houthis to respond to Israel and
to demonstrate strength failure to do
that would carry you know immediate
local consequences and of course it
would be a concern for their major Ally
Iran so I'd say it's probably one of the
factors that's really driving the
conflict more than anything so so what
else do players need to uh do in the
region or elsewhere abroad uh to ensure
that this doesn't reach an all our
war um well hopefully Lebanon can be an
absolutely key but the I'm talking about
the Lebanese State here can be an
absolutely key partner here um in terms
of like relieving pressure uh it's going
to be on I suppose the US and Iran as
external parties to really kind of I
suppose reign in uh the tensions in the
region exactly how that might happen I
am unsure but it's definitely something
that the International Community needs
to continue to watch with Incredible
interest great to get uh your insights
Christopher Morris from the University
of Portsmouth thanks for being on DW
thank you so much